Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops. And today I'm
joined by Angara Kev. She is a senior phd
student student at Central European University in Vienna. She
is a cognitive anthropologist, work on moral fairness, perceptions
of it and the topic of gender inequality. And
today we're going to talk precisely about those topics
and also individual references. So, and Gica, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Thank you so much for having me.
I'm excited.
So starting with the topic of moral fairness. Since
you are an anthropologist and come from a cognitive
anthropology perspective specifically, could you tell us first, how
do you approach such a topic, the topic of
fairness from that perspective? How do you study it?
So, I um actually, for me personally, anthropology came
a bit later in my life than behavioral sciences
and cognitive science. So I um so it sort
of depends on how exactly and which field of
study exactly do you define as cognitive anthropology? I
think there's a lot of debate about that itself.
Which part of cognitive science constitutes as cognitive anthropology.
I feel that when you're doing um field work
and when you're looking at populations in a very
detailed manner and looking at the psychological processes that
should constitute cognitive anthropology. And from that perspective, I
would say, um moral fairness would be how people
in specific societies describe fairness to be what they
find to be mutually acceptable. And fairness usually arises
in the questions of distributive justice. So how people
want uh distribution and redistribution of resources in their
land? And then uh if you're talking about it
as a cognitive anthropologist, you want to know how
people coming from different cultures, uh different groups, different
ethno linguistic groups consider uh how they want to
distribute resources within themselves. But then there's also more
philosophical traditions uh within cognitive anthropology and that would
be more prescriptive. So then you look at, um
and when it's prescriptive, it's always sort of leaning
towards um ideas of equality and equity somewhat. And
then you try to find out under what circumstances
and what kinds of people usually um wish to
have more equality in which sorts of distributions. So
there can be those two perspectives. I usually look
at the more descriptive perspective where I go out
to different populations, I give them hypothetical scenarios or
games or um other things. And then you ask
them what they consider to be fair and just
to add one thing, um there's fairness, there's a
huge problem with the language because fairness is an
English word and in many languages across the world,
including in Portuguese, in Hindi and Bengali, which are
my native languages. There is no direct translation for
fairness. So sometimes when you're trying to do this
sort of descriptive cognitive anthropology and trying to ask
people what they think of as fair, you have
to use words which mean correct uh way of
doing something or the right way of doing something.
So it's a bit um anglicized. I would say
this field of research.
Yeah. Uh That's totally true. I mean, I've already
in fact, uh fought about that in Portuguese because
we don't have a specific word for that. I
mean, uh we usually translate it fairness, we usually
say justice, but justice would be more or less
the equivalent, the equivalent of justice. And I mean,
it's not exactly the same thing. And I would
imagine that particularly when you try to study a
topic cross culturally as an anthropologist, you uh run
against these sorts of obstacles, linguistic and cultural because
many times we have to take into account that
the concepts people use in their own culture might
not correspond exactly to the way we conceptualize things
in a Western language.
Yeah, I think in the in western societies also,
I mean, there is a huge influence of the
philosophical view of equity in western populations generally because
so um let me give an example when you
go to India. Um IF you go to a,
a rural village in India which is less touched
by Western influences. And you ask uh people in
that village regarding their fairness, judgments about a specific
distribution that's happening. They would find the question very
nonsensical. They'll be like, why do we have to
judge fairness at all? Things are the way they
are whereas in the West or even within India,
but in more westernized um sections of India, there
would always be a bit of this philosophical touch
upon how they are making judgments. They think that
they can make judgments and they will always try
to have a more prescriptive approach towards making such
moral judgments of fairness
and related to fairness. I mean, it's one thing
to study fairness, but there's also how people perceive
fairness or fairness, perception. So how do you study
that specifically?
I think that's the more interesting question for me,
that's, that's what matters if people perceive unequal distributions
to be fair, I think, then we are set,
it does not really matter what it should be
and what it has been and what uh the
academic say it should be or the philosopher say
it should be. I think that's the most important
thing. And um so that in that case, the
cross cultural work becomes very interesting and important because
there's a lot of variation in how people make
up their expectations about social interactions. And um if
they are expecting social interactions or distributions to go
a certain way, they would have a higher perception
of fairness in those distributions. So it's really tied
to what's the, the sort of mutual acceptability across
in, within a society and based on those mu
mutual acceptability norms, what sort of expectations individuals have
for themselves? And that leads to perceptions of fairness.
And do these perceptions of fairness vary a lot?
Cross culturally,
yes. Yes, I, I would say so. Um Yes,
cross culturally. And I would uh be careful about
how you define culture. So I would be careful
to say it's not just across countries but within
countries within the same city, between socio economic groups,
uh between gender groups. Uh There's a lot of
variation and all of those groups I would consider
as different forms of culture. Um Yeah. So there
is um yes, a lot of cross cultural differences.
I could share one of the studies that we've
been doing recently in India. So the study started
off by us collecting um data on how people
perceive fairness within unequal divisions of labor scenarios in
online participants. So we were first studying um participants
from the UK or generalized online participants on Amazon
Mechanical Turk. And you get like a sort of
homogenized sort of responses but not a lot of
standard deviation around um the mean response. But then
uh we were doing, we start, we took this
experiment over to India and started looking at how
different socio-economic classes might have very different judgments of
fairness regarding the same unequal division of labor. And
there is indeed a lot of difference, like significant
difference between uh higher socio economic classes and lower
socio economic classes. And then if you look at
between Western societies and small scale societies, there'll be
a lot. So yeah, between these big societies within
a specific country that, yeah, there can be so
many different levels of variation. It's uh yeah, you
can ask me more specific questions, I guess. And
then I can tell you which differences occur in
which society.
Yes, sure. No, I was just going to say
before I ask you, I ask you that that
just earlier this year, I interviewed an anthropologist for
the show and we were talking precisely about this
topic of what counts as a different culture, what
are cultural differences? And at a certain point he
is American and he was saying, oh, I don't
know what people mean when they say American culture
because I don't see any unified culture here. And
then he asked me directly. 00, and what do
you think a Portuguese culture is? And I was
silent for like 10 seconds because I was like,
oh my God, I don't know how to answer
that question because there's really differences between people who
live in urban environments versus rural environments, even within
urban environments, people from different socioeconomics drive and all
of that. I mean, that, that is fairly obvious
but we're talking all the time about Portuguese culture,
American culture, German culture. And that doesn't make much
sense at all. From an anthropological,
if you look at like within your family, even,
you'll see all of these differences coming from. But
because of the generation, because of who did what
jobs and what jobs they're currently doing, how much
they've traveled, there's like a bunch of differences that
come up within the same city, within the same
society. And I, I like that about anthropology that
they recognize that. So in cross cultural psychology, what
happens is when you want to replicate your study
across cultures, you sort of go in different countries
and give the same study to different university students
in different countries. But that's really not representative of
India or Portugal or us in any way. And
anthropologists think a little bit more usually about what
does, what do you even mean by culture and
how do you delineate a group of people to
be in one culture?
So tell us then about the specific kinds of
uh societies that you've studied? Fairness perceptions in, you
mentioned India, for example. So tell us about where
you've studied uh these phenomenon specifically and what were
then the differences that you found?
So, um yeah, so the study that's that we
just finished collecting data on was in India. So
it started by being an online study. So I
have looked at populations on prolific and Amazon mechanical
talk, which are worldwide populations. I've looked specifically at
UK populations which are on prolific. And I have
to tell you that um these online participant pools,
they are not representative of the UK or any
specific country. Either these, these pools, I mean, nowadays
there's a lot of work just critiquing how these
specific pools of people who are on websites to
get paid as participants have their own sort of
ways of behaving the specific culture in itself. So
I've studied um across different participant recruitment platforms. Um
Online participants, I've done experiments in Vienna in the
lab to Austrian people. I've been going to India
and doing field work um in the city of
Pune mostly. And then I've been looking at different
socio economic groups. Uh So you in, in cities
in India, there's a lot of different um socio-economic
classes living within the same place. So you go
to a market, there's people who are sitting in
the coffee shop, drinking very expensive coffee, who are
a specific cultural group. And then there's a people
cleaning the bathrooms of that coffee shop who will
be very different. So I was doing a bit
of field work looking at how the class difference
or the socio-economic differences um affect fairness judgments. And
then um some of the very exciting work which
I have not actually gone to the field for,
but I have been working with anthropologists who have
gone to the field as the Hunter gatherer stuff.
So there's two field sites that we have. One
is in Congo, it's called, the group is called
the Benj Baka. And then we have another field
site in the Philippines. The group is called, aka,
and I've been working a lot um with those
two groups as well. And actually before my phd,
I used to do more work in person with
university students because being a university student, it's easier
to get access to other university students and not
that across different universities in the UK. But for
the fairness stuff, these are the populations that I've
been looking at
a and so looking across these different populations that
you've studied, what are perhaps some of the most
striking differences, not only across different uh countries but
also across different socio-economic stra.
So in the case of India, where I'm looking
at the differences in socio-economic groups and how that
affects people from uh lower socio-economic classes whose parents
usually have had a farming background and now they
have come to the cities to do low paying
jobs. So that's the sort of demographic that we
were looking at. They are much more attuned to
the expectations of social roles than urbanized populations who
are living in the very uh urbanized parts of
the city, basically the higher socio-economic plus. So social
roles. So this is a study that we're specifically
also trying to find out people's, um what's the
word people's endorsement of social roles in fairness, judgments
because usually in fairness judgments, you try to take
out any information about who plays which role to
sort of remove impartiality. But we think that's wrong
because if you're walking around in your offices or
your house, I mean, who plays which role and
who is in what relationship with whom really decides
what's fair in a specific situation. So we were
looking at the endorsement of social roles like um
parents, brother, sister, nephews, uh office colleagues, friends of
different sorts of all sorts of social relationships that
make up our daily life. And we were trying
to see how much they are taken into account
when a person is looking at when a person
is considering fairness of a situation. And in lower
socio economic classes in India, the social roles are
a very important way of organizing social life. And
they are very embedded in the sort of expectations
people have from themselves and from others for how
to behave with each other. And thus they think
it's an important part of making any situation fair.
Whereas that's not the case in the more westernized
um higher socio-economic classes in India
when it comes to the socio-economic classes in India,
is there still a legacy of the caste system
there or
not ask this all the time? And um I
don't know a lot to be honest, I don't
know a lot. The, I mean, I don't know
a lot scientifically about the persistence of the cast
system. So I grew up in uh GGA which
is in Delhi. So it's like a very hyper
urban place. And throughout my, so my parent, my
family does not really talk about. I, I don't
know what cast I come from, to be very
honest. And my family has never talked about this.
I, that's why I don't know, it's never been
a part of discussion. I do see that the
idea, the, the talks about cast coming up when
it comes to marriages, I've never seen it come
up in any other context like education or getting
a job or where you can live or who
you can be friends with. So I, but this
is not my scientific knowledge. This is just my
personal knowledge because yeah. Uh BUT in the case
of marriage, so now um more and more of
my friends when they get married, some of the
parents, not all are asking about what cost are
their partners gonna be from. And that is a
problem specifically for some specific costs like the Brahmins
who do not want to intermarry with non province.
Uh BECAUSE they are the pure cast. And that's
uh that's my knowledge of how much cast system
play. Well, I'm sure it's more in more rural
areas but in hyper urbanized areas, there's really not
a lot of talk about caste, I would say
no, I mean, to be fair, I haven't prepared
this question. It was just that it came to
my mind spontaneously when we were talking about
the, yeah.
Yeah, socio-economic groups in India, you know, always the
supposed uh leg or potential legacy of the caste
system which was abolished, not there that long ago.
So,
yeah, I'm pretty sure there has to be some
sort of, um, what do you say? Oh, sorry.
Another one more thing where the cost does come
into play when there's reservations in universities. So for
some specific costs and tribes there are, uh, so
India has a positive uh discrimination system which is
that you get, uh, you can have lesser, um,
academic credentials but get into the same positions. So,
um, yeah, there is a bit of cost reservation,
um, in India, in Indian Colleges. So, when I
was doing my undergrad in India, then this thing
sort of came up for a few people who
knew that they were from backward classes because obviously
there is a legacy there. If you were, um,
historically, very much disadvantaged, it will sort of carry
over. But I don't see it being a point
of issue with the urban people now. So, yeah.
Mhm. Unless they're getting married then it is apparently.
Ok. So, uh, let's change topics now and talk
a little bit about the work you've done on
individual preferences. So, uh, first of all, from an
anthropological perspective, what are individual preferences and how do
you approach them?
Yeah. So, from an anthropological perspective, you cannot approach
individual preferences without taking a look at what socio
cultural context the individual develops in and lives in.
I mean, if you were to ask a biologist
or a cognitive scientist, you'll get different answers. But
as an anthropologist or even a human behavioral Ecologist,
um you'd say individual preferences are so, so much
more determined by the environment than by individual level
factors like hormonal things. Um, THAT you should look
at the context really. So, yeah, as I've uh
even in the stuff on moral fairness and what
are individual preferences for moral fairness, we could take
it back to people's expectations, what people expect for
themselves. And that is highly shaped by what they
have seen to be possible in, in the groups
around them. So in their families, in their cultures,
whatever people have been getting, I'm not saying that
individuals don't want to move away from unequal systems
or disadvantaged systems. Uh JUST because their parents have
also been disadvantaged, but how much they want to
move away from it is going to be determined
by how, how disadvantaged their parents were. So a
little bit of social mobility might be great for
them and not so great for other people who
have been made to feel more privileged in their
childhood.
Uh And when we're talking about social expectations here
that translates into or refers to a group values
and norms,
right. Yes. So social expectations, people, others expectations of
you would be, um, group values and norms, but
I was talking more about individual expectations, the kind
of idea you have in your head about what
sort of life you should have and what you
deserve and what you should get. So, I think
I was referring more to the individual expectations which
are also really shaped by what you've seen to
be possible in your specific, um, social group and
is shaped by social expectations.
Mhm And, and how do you apply that to
studying phenomena like individualism and collectivism?
So this is something that I used to do
a while ago. Uh Stuff on individualism, collectivism. I'm
still teaching that though. So individual, so I would
not, I'd say that you're not applying an understanding
of um individual preferences on individualism collectivism. It's the
other way around. There are, there is the idea.
So the idea of individualism collectivism is a concept.
It's not the physical thing that's present in any
individual. So there's a concept of some shared norms
or shared idea of how to do things. And
that would in fact, uh affect the individual's preferences
of what sort of foods they like and how
they think their goals should be determined and what
sort of family structures they want. So, yeah, usually
if the, the individualistic and collectivistic um differences between
uh cultures is something you can use as an
explanation for why individuals have specific preferences or not.
I would say
uh by the way do you think that this
sort of individualism, collectivism, uh, divide, that would also
the way we would analyze that would be along
the lines of what we've talked about before. When
it comes to, even within the same country, there
are being cultural differences across socio-economic strait, across people
that live in urban versus rural areas. Because, I
mean, we usually talk about, for example, weird countries
being tendentially more individualistic and for example, East Asian
countries being more collectivist collectivistic. But I mean, wouldn't
we also see some of those differences? Uh, I
mean, the across the individualism collectivism spectrum occur within
the countries and across different groups as well.
Yeah. So let me ask you a question, what
do you, uh, if, um, individualism were one and
collectivism were 10, where would you put yourself to
be if you were to rate yourself on the
scale between individualism and collectivism?
Uh, OH, that's very easy for me. I mean,
I would, it would be like an eight, I
mean, I'm much more collectivist, an individualist really.
But then people would de irate your country because
it comes within Europe. It's one of the European
countries to be very individualistic. And I think whenever
I ask any of my students, this question, there's
always the sort of gap in how the literature
characterizes their country to be like, which sort of
scale and what they themselves character, characterize themselves to
be. And the same goes for them characterizing their
families, their friends. There's all sorts of variation. And
um so there is a lot of variation between
countries. And I think there's been a lot of
um what do you say? Um CRITICISM of the
east and the west divide, there's differences based on
age, there's differences based on socio economic class, there's
differences based on how educated you are. There's differences
based on gender and these differences will be there
within each country, within each city, within each um
town. And it's really hard to say that the
whole of the US is going to be very
individualist and all of China is going to be
very collectivist that the younger populations in China are
probably a lot more individualist than the older generations
in the US or specific counties of the uh
not counties, specific states of the US would be
a lot more collectivist than specific cities like Beijing.
I don't know. I, I mean, I haven't looked
at specific data but I'm just guessing and I
think those sort of divides are sometimes a lot
more important and a lot more informative than just
this whole country, sort of countrywide differences.
But still on the topic of individualism and collectivism,
do we know what sorts of cultural factors play
a role in a preference for one or the
other?
Um What sort of culture? So I think your
immediate group that you're physically surrounded by as a
child, so your family matters your neighborhood probably matters
what sort of, um, economic, socio economic conditions you
grew up in that matters. And nowadays, another thing
which is super relevant is how much you've moved
and traveled as a child or as a young
adult. Because nowadays everyone's traveling all the time and
that would really have an effect on how individualist
you become and how collectivist you become the sort
of life situations you've had matters. How early was
it that you moved out of your house uh
out of your parents house. So there's um like
a lot of the initial studies on individualism, collectivism
was based on which country was your birth country.
But nowadays, uh there's more and more studies looking
at things like socio-economic class and how it makes
you more individualistic or more collectivistic. So there's a,
there's a list of factors I think.
Uh And uh at a certain point there, you
mentioned people also moving or traveling. So can these
preferences for individualism or collectivism change in new cultural
environments? I mean, if someone moves to a new
cultural environment, can they become reps a little bit
more individually or a little bit more collectivist?
Yes. Um And that can happen. So, yeah, the
que the answer would be a big yes. And
that can happen. I would say due to two
reasons. Firstly, if you're moving to a more individualistic
culture, you would at some point adopt some of
the behavioral um ways of living of those cultures.
But also when you're moving away from, um, your
house and you're learning to be self sufficient. I
mean, what exactly is individualism and collectivism? Right. So,
um, individualism is having a more independent control of
the world and a more independent way of living
than being interdependent. That's basically what it is at
the heart of it. So, if you are traveling
and if you're living alone and that's why I
mentioned it would vary for um young adults who
have moved away from their parents at an earlier
age and lived alone even within the same country
versus those who have not. So I think if
you're learning to live alone in a very new
place, you would at some point learn to have
uh more individual traits of behavior and you might
not like it. And if you're really uncomfortable with
it, you might move back to your home country,
you might, um, or you might end up finding
a new group of friends which whom on whom
you can rely on. But I think the fact
of moving to another country, not just because of
their ways of living, but also because you are
having to learn to live by yourself would lead
to a higher level of individualism. And uh a
more academic answer to this possibility of change is
there's been a lot of studies on first. Um
What do you, what's it called? 1st, 1st generation
migrants, second generation migrants? Third generation migrants where you're
sort of looking at progressive increases of individualistic traits
across generations of a specific migrant group in the,
in London or in any other place. I, I'm
remembering a study that was done in London and
there is definitely a higher and higher um um
um a greater and greater change in the amount
of individualism these different generations of migrants show and
it's called acculturation. There's a specific scientific term for
it. And a lot of sociologists and psychologists study
this, it's called a cult. It's been around for
a while. It's been around this term has been
around since the 1975 Engelhart and Baker gave a
definition of cultures changing because of intermixing of cultures.
And when you say cultures are changing, basically people
within those cultures are changing because there's a lot
of mixing up of populations.
So another topic that I would like to ask
you about and is that is a big part
of your work as well? Is gender inequality? So
what is gender inequality? Again, from an anthropological perspective?
I mean, what counts as gender inequality?
It depends on which it depends on which question
you're interested in. Are you interested in economic inequality,
political inequality, household inequality, inequality of opportunities. So there
can be inequality in pretty much any domain of
human social life. And um again, if you're talking
about the anthropological perspective and OK, I, I think
uh all the uh so far every time you've
been asking me the anthropological perspective, I've been giving
you the social and cultural anthropological perspective. Not the
evolutionary one, the evolutionary one is closer to human
behavioral ecology or the biological one to be honest.
So, yeah, just um whenever you're seeing anthropology, just
know that I'm responding as a social cultural anthropologist
and not the other branches. But uh yeah, so
you can look at any domain of social activity
where there is some sort of um differences in
either distribution of resources or distribution of opportunities or
distribution of autonomy, decision making power between the genders.
So there's any sort of uh differences between gender
groups and that would form your study of gender
inequality as an anthropologist.
And what sorts of factors uh do you look
into and that are behind gender inequality? Like for
example, ecological, social, economical and economic and all of
that, what specific kinds of factors play a role
in how gender inequality develops across societies?
You're talking about what I look at or
what, what do you look at the N DS
more generally? Also if you could talk more generally
about some of those factors.
Yeah, so there's so many different factors and so
many different theoretical speculations regarding how and at what
point in human history, the gender inequality emerge. That
is ecological factors, there's um geographical factors, there's economic
factors, there's a social factor, there's all the kind
of factors that you said they're all involved. So
one of the more evolutionary, one of the most
famous evolutionary um narratives of why and how gender
inequality came about talks about the fact that in
hunting gathering societies super small scale, very tight knit
um nomadic groups which are practicing immediate return, sort
of subsistence activities. They are very egalitarian. That that's
the kind of study. Uh THAT'S the kind of
societies that I study right now as well. And
they are really egalitarian. Uh That's what we find
over and over again. And then the evolutionary narrative
goes that once uh material storage became prevalent in
human societies, you could store uh whatever food you
were producing, that allowed you to become sedentary because
now your resources are sort of under your control,
you can start to domesticate resources and you have
the emergence of material wealth and higher reliance on
agriculture generally because now you're sedentary, you're controlling your
crops. That is the sort of time when um
inequality between men and women started to emerge. That's
one of the theories. And as any evolutionary theories
is very hotly debated, but it's the one that
has most support I would say. And um and
there's, there's a few um anthropologists who have been
lucky enough to see the transition within their lifetime.
So they started off as phd students, uh Patricia
Draper, she started off as a phd student looking
at the Kung bushmen of uh Botswana when they
were still nomadic and very much reliant on hunting
and gathering. But now with all the industrialized societies
expanding like anything and hunting gathering society, sort of
getting, you know, pushed away to the fringes and
sometimes being swallowed up by these industrialized societies. So
her population, the one she started, started off as
a phd student looking at they eventually became more
and more integrated with the nearby villages, they became
sedentary and then she saw that there they are.
Then she has like a whole record of the
amounts of gender inequality that would emerge. And she
has various theories about that. So it's not just
the physical act of becoming sedentary, which would lead
to that, but the kind of subsistence practices that
you have uh would have an effect. What sort
of agriculture you start doing? In the case of
the gung community in Botswana, they started trading with
the nearby Bantu villagers a lot and the Bantu
are known to be very uh gender unequal. And
her Patricia Draper thinks that um it's not just
a sedentary organization, but they had to become sedentary
because they were trading with the Bantu. And then
you sort of start taking up their social norms
into your own culture. And that would be one
of the reasons why they went from being gender
egalitarian to gender in egalitarian. And then there's the
theory about the plow and how plow agriculture specifically
because if a lot of ecological affordances that it
has uh would lead to the relegation of women
into the domestic sphere. And yeah, uh
but, but ii, I mean, perhaps I'm missing just
one small step here or maybe I've missed something
among all of what you said there. But uh
what uh so we have material storage right in
uh agricultural societies or perhaps in some larger scale
under gatherer societies where that occurs? But why does
material storage lead to gender inequality in the sense
of uh men acquiring more power and status than
women? Why couldn't it be the reverse? I mean
gender inequality but in on the opposite, in the
opposite direction.
So for there's two answers to this. So one
of the reasons why accumulation of wealth would lead
to inequality generally is because now you have wealth
that needs to be passed on to the next
generations. You have worked hard enough and there has
to be a sort of an emergence of a
lineage system. And then you can say, well, the
lineage system could be either on the maternal side.
Uh YOU pass on the wealth along the maternal
side and that's called matrilineal societies and they do
exist or on the paternal side. And then the
second answer comes into play which is um the
emergence of plow agriculture allow uh was instrumental in
giving men a lot more power over crop production
and crop control and good for women. So uh
plow requires just the the structure, the technological structure
of the plow is such that you need to
be uh you need to use a lot of
upper body strength. And when plows came into being
in subsistence, men became more important in crop production.
And then, then they are controlling all the resources,
they're controlling the food, which is the most fundamental
resource. And women cannot work on the fear. So
they are more and more in the house. They
are more involved in giving birth and child rearing
and then the wealth is passed on from one
male to the other and then it goes along
the patrilineal side.
Yeah. So, uh I I also want to address
some claims that people nowadays make particularly in the
more developed societies about gender equality or inequality. But
just before we get into that, and there's a
sort of segue into that. Um HOW do industrialized
societies tend to compare uh to compare to uh
hunter gatherer societies and agricultural societies when it comes
to levels of gender inequality?
OK. So, um hunter gatherer society is the ones
that I have been looking at which are immediate
returns, small scale hunter gatherer societies, not uh semi
sedentary, large scale ones because I guess you know
that there's all sorts of hunter gatherers. So yeah,
specific kind that I'm looking at there is a
lot. So the industrialized societies are nowhere near when
it comes to gender equality. These hunt small scale
immediate return, hunter gatherer societies are known to be
very, very egalitarian. They are. There's Jerome Lewis coined
the term assertively egalitarian for the Benj Baka. One
of the groups that I'm looking at, um, and
they're egalitarian because so there is a differentiation in
genders in such that men and women are usually
doing different things in the economy. Economy is just
food, um, acquisition at this, at this stage, but
both the things are really important. So in hunting
and gathering ways of life, you hunt, that's a
lot of protein and a lot of calories. But
it also happens rarely. And it's, um, when it
happens, it's amazing and you're, you're contributing a lot
more than gathering can, but it happens rarely and
it's very uncertain when it's going to happen. And
it depends not just on skill but on luck.
So men are bringing in calories but not every
day. And if women are the ones who are
gathering, they are the ones bringing in calories, which
are much more reliable, much more regular. And thus,
there's equal value to the production being, uh, production
of both males and females. But at the same
time, there's a lot of interchange between the roles
of men being hunting, men, being hunters and women
being gatherers as well because men go gathering when
they can't go to hunt. And women are most
of the times when there is net hunting involved
in the groups that go out to hunt in
a, in a big group for net hunting. So
I think because of this very important economic um
contribution factor of both males and females, they are
a lot more gender egalitarian, they are independent, they
can fend for themselves. So they're not, they're not
dependent on their partners and both of them are
valued a lot more. And because of that, there's
a lot more decision making power for women in
these hunter gatherer societies and industrialized societies have, I
mean, it depends on again which industrialized societies you're
talking about. Of course, there's so many and we
know that in places like the Nordic countries, the
gender parity index is much, much, much higher than
let's say in Portugal or in the Philippines or
in India. So there's a huge difference there as
well. But on the whole, um and agricultural societies
are really bad. I mean, if they come from
a lineage of plow agriculture and not um what's
the other form? Um THE one with the sticks,
one there's another shifting agriculture, sorry. Yeah. Um The
the countries which come from a tradition of plow
agriculture have much more gender unequal norms which have
carried over into the present day. They don't do
plow agriculture as the main thing anymore. But the
norms still exist. So agriculture really brought about a
huge amount of gender inequality and that carried over
in European societies. And when the Europeans were colonizing
Americas, they brought all of the hierarchical systems with
them. And I think after World War Two, when
women got more involved in the labor force, uh
things have changed again. But before World War two,
really, there was a lot more inequality than what
we see nowadays. So, um yeah, it's a bit
of a complex thing. But on the whole immediate
return, gender, uh immediate return, hunter gatherers are a
lot more gender egalitarian than quite a few of
the industrialist societies in the world.
Uh That's very interesting. And I really wanted to
ask you that because a very common narrative that
we hear nowadays many times from political pundits, but
also other times from other kinds of people, even
sometimes some scientists is that uh there's this narrative
as how uh I mean, particularly in the West
with the rise of the enlightenment and capitalism, all
of those sorts of things. Uh Eventually there was
uh the emancipation of women. And nowadays, I don't
know a few decades on uh gender inequality is
mostly they claim a thing of the past. But
I, I mean, there's lots to say about that,
right?
Yeah, I I, you brought this up and I
was thinking about this because my brother was also
talking about this that oh nowadays everyone is saying
he's in the industry. I don't know what's going
on in the industry. I just know what's going
on in the academic world, but he's doing a
job. And he was saying, oh, yeah, gender inequality
is a thing of the past. And I was
like, really, I, I don't know, I mean, if
the narrative is out there, I'm, I'm not questioning
that this narrative is out there, but how can
it be a thing of the past? It's something
that should just sort of continue, right? I mean,
even if you do achieve equality, then you have
lesser and lesser steps to take. But it's important
to sort of maintain um equal decision making power
between men and women even once it has been
achieved wherever it has been achieved. And I think
there's just so many domains in which their inequalities
exist. You can say that it's a thing of
the past perhaps in work cultures. But then there's
things like which uh sort of professions do. Men
and women get equal chances in or which academic
disciplines are more represented by women or less represented
by women or things like household division of labor,
which is something I look at a lot where
inequalities are still there. So it's not really a
thing of the past, it's great that some steps
have been made towards it. But it can't, it
should not become a thing of the past because
even when you reach very equal systems, it takes
work to maintain that equality, I would say, and
there are still domains where equality has not been
reached in academic disciplines. If you go to the
stem departments or if you, I mean, even in
cognitive science departments the gender ratio is very skewed,
I would say
and when it comes to the household division of
labor specifically, o of course, I, I mean, here
in Portugal, we don't compare at all to the
Nordic countries nor anything like that. Uh I mean,
we're really lagging kind but even I would imagine
that even in the Nordic countries, I mean, sometimes
we look at them as the El Dorado of
gender equality and all of that. But I bet
there's still important imbalances there.
Yeah, gender, household, uh sorry, gender division of household
labor is definitely one of the things. So this
is something that I'm looking at uh in the
most detail, even in the hunter gathering societies and
um in industrialized societies, there is a ton of
sociological data which shows that there has been an
overall rise in men's participation in the household. But
the inequality was so large that it's, it's nowhere
near equal. It's not 50% by each gender whatsoever
and not even in the Nordic countries, maybe in
some households. Sure. But at a level of the
country, no, we are still, we still have a
lot of work to do in that area for
sure.
And what in one of your papers, you explore
the economic, cultural and cognitive processes that underlie such
inequality. So co could you tell us about uh
each of them? I mean, uh the economic, I
guess that we've already talked about them a little
bit but particularly the cultural and even more so,
the cognitive processes, what are some of the uh
factors that play a role here?
So, um and so this was a paper that
I was doing a collaboration with a sociologist and
a cognitive psychologist. So we were trying to come
up with our own explanations of why inequalities in
the household specifically in the household um remain. And
more specifically, we're looking at why a lot of
women who are the disadvantaged parties in the household
continue to find it fair. And uh what the
sociologist has to say is that there is a
huge role of cultural narratives. So if there are
specific narratives about gender roles, uh what is the
hegemonic ideas of masculinity? Feminine, you that's so ingrained
in your brain that you sort of want to
live up to those ideals and those are the,
that sort of division is what you think to
be the expected one and thus the fair one.
And um these sort of ideals and narratives really
shape a lot of inequality which women would themselves
then propagate. And the cognitive. Um PSYCHOLOGIST was looking
at how individuals who are clearly having to do
more work are able to justify this. Like what's
why are they OK with this? And he was
looking at motivated cognition. So if because you want
to not think of yourself as a victim and
you do not want to introduce uncertainty and imbalance
in your system. So if you're trying to question
the status quo, it will introduce a lot of
uncertainty into your household, into your life, into your
social circles. Um And people have a very strong
preference to not do that. They want to sort
of maintain some semblance of control even though they
don't have it on a larger, if you look
at it from a larger scale, but within their
household, they think that, OK, we have decided to,
to do this and thus we will. So it's
almost a little bit self delusional, the stories that
we tell ourselves. And he was uh trying to
come up with this information, theoretic framework of motivated
cognition. Um In simple words, individuals are motivated to
justify their own situations, however unequal, they may be
to be fair um just in order to reduce
the uncertainty from their lives. And yeah, so that
could be one of that's the very individual level
cognitive processes which can sort of continue the perpetuation
of inequalities,
you know. So sometimes uh I wonder when it
comes to women who live in unequal circumstances, to
what extent this sort of uh rationalizations, if we
want to call them that help with their well
being because I mean, I wonder if even if
they live in unequal circumstances, they might feel well
with themselves just because they are behaving in ways
that correspond to the norms of their local group
or something like that. So you know, perhaps uh
I, I know sometimes we can be a little
bit condescending as well when thinking about people like
these because they, they might actually say that they
like living like that. And that might be true,
even though from other perspectives it wouldn't be. But
anyway, do you, do you understand what I'm trying
to say?
I know exactly what you're talking about. So this
perception of fairness and I'm saying, perception of fairness,
not just fairness is super important in justifying the
state of life that you're in. So uh the
motivated cognition person uh which is looking at the
cognitive explanations was trying to look at this. Exactly.
Sometimes you want to ignore information. So let's say
in an experiment, we provide um other men or
other women with the stats of their country of
this is how much work women are doing so
that they are faced with the reality that there
is inequality. Sometimes they, they will be able to
ignore it, not consciously, but subconsciously, they'll ignore it
or they will not want to be faced with
specific forms of information just because they don't want
to feel like they're in a victimized position. And
that sort of self delusion, I mean, in psychological
literature, you call it, it's not a bad thing.
It's a, it's a way of living in the
world. And I think all of us have some
sort of positive or negative d uh uh what
do you say delusional concepts of the world, we
never see the world exactly at it as it
is, we can have an optimistic or pessimistic view
of the world. And this sort of corresponds to
that. So if you think that your situation is
fair, you will be in a much happier marriage,
your mental health will be a lot better. And
in the case of housing division of labor, they
found that even within similarly unequal divisions of labor,
the people who rate this division of labor to
be fair versus people who rate this division of
labor to be unfair. There's a huge difference in
their overall life, happiness, relationship, happiness, the probability of
divorce their mental health issues. So yeah, if you
can think of it in an optimistic way and
you can tell yourself that what I'm doing is
what everyone has done. So it's completely fine or
you have any other justifications, you can say that
you like to do like you know that you
find a purpose and it's not even wrong because
if you believe it, who is anybody else to
say that it's wrong? So this is uh it
becomes very weird because at the one level, I'm
doing observational studies where I'm bringing in my perspective
of how gender relations should look like. And I
understand that that's a very ethnocentric academic perspective. And
who am I to say anything to the women
or the men who are actually genuinely happy? Because
happiness is only a subjective phenomenological feeling, right? With
whatever divisions they have. So, yeah, I know what
you're talking about and it's really important to understand
what leads to this sort of uh justifications.
Yeah, I, I mean, this sort of uh the
questions debates uh are really interesting, particularly among sometimes
even feminists themselves because perhaps some of them would
talk about uh patriarchy and the underlying patriarchal structure
of a society, the economics of it, the politics
of it, the social structure and all of that.
And they would that definitely, of course, have a
point when saying that reps, there are certain women
that accept the, the gender inequality because they live
in those sorts of contexts. And we should, of
course, they should these already ethics, not really science,
but we should try to help for them for
their emancipation. But on the other hand, I mean,
it is also worth considering arguments uh coming from
other sorts of feminists when they say that, ok,
but you emancipate the women, but then if some
of them still prefer for one reason or the
other to have this sort of marital arrangement, I
mean, that's on them, that's OK because they're making
their own decisions. And if they prefer things like
that, I mean, are we to judge them? Right.
Exactly. And I just came across the term very
recently. Choice feminism, which is where you're simply supporting
choices of women. You're not saying with choice is
better or worse. Uh BUT individuals should be allowed
to make a choice. But I mean, everything, there's
always like so many problems with everything. Choice. Feminism
sounds great. But choices are very much shaped by
the cultural narratives that you've lived in, the cultural
expectations that you've grown up in. So I think
one of the important things, so in this paper
that you brought up where we are looking at
economic cultural cognitive precedence of gender inequality, we say
that we can't say what's right or what's wrong
with the policy significance of such work is that
you provide individuals with as large of an information
environment that you can uh women from across the
world should have some way to reach out to
women from other parts of the world. And there,
there should be some communication and there should be
a larger informational environment from which individuals can then
make a choice knowing that other choices also existed.
So that, that's when it's a choice, right? When
you know that there's other alternatives that you could
have picked. And it's a very like it's a
very not frustrating. It's a very weird situation where
the things that you bring up, but you don't
know exactly what to do because somebody might want
to be a stay at home mom. She does
not wanna work and that's completely fine. But we
don't know why she's thinking that because we know
how individual preferences are completely shaped by our upbringing
and our cultures and everything else.
Yeah. And I mean, of course, I'm not a
woman so I don't have to deal with those
sorts of issues specifically. But I, I mean, I
consider arguments from both sides when it comes to
the feminist spectrum because on the one hand, since
I'm very much into anthropology, I'm very well aware
of all the factors we've talked here about today.
Uh uh WHEN it comes to the economic factors,
sexual division of labor where it stems from and
all of that. So basically what underlies gender inequality.
So I, I have a, a fairly good understanding
of where that comes from. And so I understand
when uh feminists who are against women accepting certain
kinds of social roles, uh really accepting them, I
mean, uh feminists who are against that. But on
the other hand, I mean, it, I also understand
arguments from so called choice feminists when they say
that, oh, you're just being condescending as long as
women make their are allowed to make their own
choices, they can do whatever they want with their
lives. Otherwise we're taking agency from them. I mean,
they're no longer agents who just tell them what
they should do, how they should behave and how
is that different from patriarchy telling them that they
should be in the kitchen or something like that.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And you cannot go either way.
There's, you're losing on both sides then Yeah, exactly.
I think one of the important things that I
feel because I, of course I'm reading up constantly
on it and I'm working on it. One of
the important things that I feel we could do
without any argument from either side of feminists is
give every individual, every adult individual, regardless of sex,
whatever sexual orientation, some sort of economic freedom. Because
if you allow people to be able to fend
for themselves, then they can have a specific choice.
I think that sort of everyone would agree with.
If there's independence of some sort in how well
they can live, then you can have choices. You
can and you'll have emancipation both at the same
time, I think. And yeah, that's what I find
with the hunting gathering stuff as well. If you
look at revolutionary history, that's been one of the
main precipitator of gender inequality. So I think that's
an important thing that's important to give to women.
Like don't take away their options by taking away
their livelihood from them, allow them to be able
to feed themselves basically.
Yeah. So let me ask you one last question
and still related to gender inequality. So do you
think that we can use or we could apply
this knowledge coming from anthropology and even the sort
of uh processes that we've talked about relating to
the household, division of labor, the economic culture and
cognitive processes. Knowledge about that to help reduce uh
gender inequality.
Yes, I think academia has a good role to
play. Um Firstly, uh one thing that I was
saying, if you increase uh the knowledge that women
have of how women in other parts of the
world behave and live, that's already giving them power
in terms of opening up their knowledge of uh
how they could possibly potentially live. Um There is
some really interesting work which one of my collaborators
is doing where we give. Um So I'm moving
away from topic a little bit, but it's a
good example of this thing of how we can
use academia to influence um gender health basically. So
he's looking at um postpartum depression. So he's working
with postpartum depression in, in women, of course. Um
And what they're doing is he's an evolutionary anthropologist
and in the clinics where mothers go after giving
birth, they are, they are putting out these pamphlets
which talks about how women in ancestral society were
raising their Children. They were not raising Children without
any social support. They had huge social support. They
were not the only parents, they usually had a
lot of other mothers, a lot of other Children,
a lot of other families helping them out. Basically,
to provide the narratives to new mothers that if
you're feeling helpless as a mom, which is sometimes
one of the major causes of depression, don't feel
like that because humans were not naturally genetically wired
to be this way. We've always had a very
strong social connection thing and a mothering has been
a part of our evolutionary history. So now as
a single parent, when sometimes you feel at loss,
don't feel that loss and don't go into a
circle of guilt because of that because we were
not meant to be so isolated as mothers. And
that helps, I mean, just having that information, having
that knowledge that this is not something strange and
there's an evolutionary reason for it and people, most
of the time do trust in scientists and what
they're saying and you can support that with data,
it really helps to open up their um understanding
of their own selves. And I think that's really
important. So in uh increasing the information environment that
people have and making them understand the theoretical underpinnings
of human behavior can really help them understand why
they behave in specific ways, be more empathetic to
the ways the world is and also have more
choice in bringing changing things around um in their
specific groups.
Great. So where can people find you and your
work on the internet?
Google Scholar, Research Gate academia.edu. And I don't have
a website yet, but I will be working on
it soon. But yeah, the main academic forums, Google
scholar has all of my stuff. So if you
put in my name there, you'll come up with
all the stuff. And um if you provide show
note captions, I don't know if you do. My
email is always, I mean, I'm happy to give
out my email in case anyone wants to talk
about anything specific to anything that we've talked about.
Mhm. Yes, I will leave links to all of
that in the description of the interview and uh
and Gary, thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
really fun to talk with you.
Yeah, it's been really nice. Thanks. It was a
very natural conversation. You're good at this. You're clearly
very good at this. Thanks a lot for inviting
me. It was great to meet you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and La Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel Sran, David Wilson, the
dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli
Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stass, Nale Me, Gary
G Alman, Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price
Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Lati Gilon
Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di Costa Anton Erickson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Fist, Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey.
Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson,
Chris Tori Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda
Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine
Steinman, Perlis Kate Von Goler Alexander Albert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good
enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom
Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon Benedikt Muller Thomas
Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carlman Negro, Nick
Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Si, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank
you for all.